To T H E NINE HE LLS!
CHAPTER 1: A TALE OF 1\vo CITIES
For characters of levels 1-4

Pressed into service by the Flaming Fist, the characters seek out and destroy Dead Three cultists
who are threatening Baidu r's Gate. As the machinations of the Vanthampur family come to light,
the characters have a cha nce to confront Thavius
Kreeg, the architect ofElturel's downfall, before
traveling to Candlekeep to unlock a mysterious
puzzle box and gain safe passage to the Nine Hells.

I
CHAPTER 2: ELTUREL HAS FALLEl
For characters of levels 5- 6

After befriending a hollyphant named Lulu, the
characters help survivors in Elturel, a city anchored by chains above the River Styx on the first
layer of the Nine Hells, and search for Grand Duke
Ulder Ravengard of Baldur's Gate.

____

_.)

CHAPTER 3: AVERNUS
For characters oflevels 7- 10

The characters venture across the wastelands of
Avernus in search of allies, face off against warlords and fiends, and search for a way to destroy
the Companion or break E lturel's chains.

r

CHAPTER 4 : SWORD OF ZARIEL
For characters of levels 11- 12

~

The Sword of Zariel might be the key to Elturel's
salvation, but to get it, the characte rs must find the
Bleeding Citadel- a litt le slice of heaven trapped in
hell. After they unlock Lulu's memories and claim
the sword, the characters must decide who is fit to
wield s uch a powerful weapon of good. _ _ _ _ )

I

I

I.

C H APTER 5: ESCAPE FROM AVERNUS
For characters of levels 13 and higher

The characters use the treasures they've acquired
and the deals they've made to free themselves and
Elturel from Avernus. Will they use the Sword
ofZariel or strike an infernal bargain to free the
planetar trapped in the Companion? Will they coax
a demon into breaking Elturel's chains? Or will
they cut a deal with the archdevil Zariel?
______.

J

DIAGRAM 0 .1: ADVENTUR E fL O W, t<l\RT

ABOIJT THE ADV£NTUllE

Chapter 2 opens with the characters' arrival in Elturel,
which is anchored by enormous chains and trapped under the baleful light of the Companion. If the characters
do nothing, the city will be pulled down into the River
Styx and bound to the Nine Hells forever. Lulu tries her
best to serve as the party's guide in Avernus, but the hollyphant's memories are fragmented. It becomes clear,
however, that Lulu has a personal connection to Zariel,
dating back to the archdevil's former angelic existence.
After scouring Elturel for survivors and clashing
with the denizens of Avernus, the characte rs encounter the valiant Ulder Ravengard, who has been
placed in the most unusual s ituation of defending a
city he has long opposed. The beleaguered Ravengard
urges the characters to do whatever they can to free
Elturel and return what's left of it to FaerOn. To do so,
they must scour Avernus for the means to destroy the
Companion or break the enormous chains that shackle
that city, as described in chapter 3.
Avernus has long been a battlefield in the never-ending Blood War. Apart from clashing demons and devils, petty warlords scour the Avernian wastelands in
search of treasure. salvage, and fuel for their infernal
war machines. Characters who forge an alliance with
one warlord risk alienating the others . By acquiring
an infernal war machine, characters can travel quickly
across Avernus-a domain rife with tortured souls, warmongers, and devils eager to tempt would-be heroes into
soul-corrupting deals.
The more time she spends with the characters, the
more Lulu begins to remember long-lost memories of
the Sword ofZariel, an angelic weapon with the power
to destroy the Companion. After Zariel's fall from grace,
the sword was hidden in a stronghold called the Bleeding Citadel-a celestial sanctuary trapped in Avernus.
The quest for the sword forms the crux of chapter 4,
leading to the revelation that Zariel can be redeemed.
The characters' success doesn't hinge on acquiring
the Sword of Zariel or helping Zariel find redemption,
as Gargauth is quick to point out should the characters
consult with him. There are other ways to free Elturel,
but only if the characters are willing to cut deals with
Avernus's most evil denizens. The characters might
broker a deal with the deposed archdevil Bel, who
longs to supplant Zariel and regain his title as ruler of
Avernus. They might stoke the rage of a horrific demon
called Crokek'toeck and trick it into gnawing through
Elturel's chains. They might come to terms with an evil
dragonborn paladin named Arkhan the Cruel, using
him to broker a deal with Tiamat. By returning her stolen treasure, characters can convince Tiamat to break
Elturel's chains.
As tempting as such purs uits can be, the characters
must be careful, for devil deals, demon lords, and Tiamat's rage number among the multiverse's greatest
threats. Also, Zariel herself might become cross with
the characters for daring to meddle in her diabolical
affairs. How the adventure concludes depends on the
choices the characters make, the chaos they foment, and
the deals they forge, as discussed in chapter 5.

ADVENTURE BACKGROUND
On the plane of Mount Celestia, the angel Zariel chastised her peers for not getting involved in the Blood War.
She felt that it was the responsibility of the angelic host
to destroy evil in the multiverse, rather than stand back
and watch demons and devils annihilate one another,
destroying vast swaths of the multiverse in the process.
In defiance of her superiors, Zariel left Mount Celestia
and went to Elturel, where she rallied an army of warriors and trained them to fight in the Blood War. She
promised them that when they were ready, she would
lead them into battle on Avernus.
Zariel led her army out of Elturel amid a throng of
cheering well-wishers and proud citizens in 1354 DR.
ln an epic charge known as the Ride, Zariers army entered Avernus and took the fight to the archdevi1 Bel and
his infernal legions. Many of Zariel's warriors fought
bravely, but for others, the horrors of the Nine Hells
proved too great. They fled back through the portal, sealing it behind them and never revealing their shameful
retreat and betrayal. The Hellriders. as they were called.
would wear this badge of shame to the grave.

ZARIEL'S FALL
Zariel lost more rhan her army on Avernus. She also lost
a hand, which was severed in battle. As her sword fell to
the ground, Zariel ordered Yael, her most devoted general, to take the weapon and hide it, so that the devils
would not destroy or corrupt it. Yael took the sword and
fled, along with Zariel's faithful hollyphant companion,

Lulu. Zariel's other two generals, Olanthius and Haruman, refused to leave Zariel's side. All three were captured and sent to Nessus, the lowest of the Nine Hells.
There, Zariel was brought before Asmodeus, who welcomed her with open arms. The Lord of the Nine commended Zariel for her battle prowess and the strength
of her convictions. He offered her rulership of Avernus,
much to Bel's chagrin. By swearing fealty to Asmodeus
and the Nine Hells, Zariel could bring her rage to bear
against the demons and continue to fight in the Blood
War, with legions of devils under her command. Zariel
accepted Asmodeus's terms, completing her fall from
grace. Harurnan followed his master into damnation
willingly and was transformed into a narzugon devil,
while Olanthius, who took his own life rather than bow
before Asmodeus, was brought back to serve as a death
knight under Zariel's burning gaze.

THE COMPANION
Zariel never forgot her betrayers- those who ran from
the battlefield. She kept a close eye on Elturel, waiting
for the day when she could enact her revenge. Thar day
came in 1444 DR, when Elturel was conquered by a
vampire lord. A priest of Torm named Thavius Kreeg
appealed to any power to help him save bis holy city. In
that instant, Zariel emerged from a pillar of fire and offered him a deal, which Thavius readily accepted.
In the sky over Elturel, a radiant sphere called the
Companion appeared, blazing like a second sun. Powered by a planetar imprisoned within it, the Companion
bathed Elturel and the surrounding countryside in holy
ABOUT THE ADVENTURE

7

