PRONUNCIATI ON GUIDE
This guide shows how to pronounce many of the non-English names that appear in this adventure.

Name

Pronunciation

Abishai
Amnizu

AB-ish-eye

Devil loyal to Tiamat that exists outside the Infernal Hierarchy

am- N EET-zoo
AM-rik VAN-tham-pe r

Greater devil that guards gateways to the Nine Hells
Second son of Duke Thalamra Vanthampur of Baldur's Gate

Amrik Vantham pur
Arkhan the Cruel
Asmodeus

Description

AR-kawn

Evil dragonborn champion ofTiamat

az-moh-DAY-us, or

Archdevil, greater god, and Lord of the Nine Hells

az-MOH-dee-us
Baphomet

BAF-oh-met

Demon lord worshiped by minotaurs

Balarystul

bah-tar-RISS-tut

Ancient copper dragon that has infiltrated the Wandering Emporium

Bazelsteen

BAY-zel-steen

Horned devil that oversees flying fortress repairs at the Stygian Dock

Belynne Stelmane

beh-UN STEL-mane

Bhaal

BAWL

One of four dukes on the Council of Four that governs Baldur's Gate
Mortal god of murder, and one of the Dead Three

Bulezau

BOO-leh-zow

Horned demon with rotting flesh

Crokek'toeck

CROW-kek-toe-ick

Gargantuan demon that carries other demons inside it

Dillard Portyr

DILL-erd por-TEER

One of four dukes on the Council of Four that governs Baidu r's Gate

Falaster Fisk

FAL-ass-ter

Helpful spy imprisoned in the dungeon under Vanthampur Villa

Fhet'Ahla

fett-AH-lah

Amnizu that runs From Here to Avernus in the Wandering Emporium

Gabourey D'Vaelan

gah-BUR-ee duh-VAY-Ian

Cook who works at Vanthampur Villa in Baldur's Gate

Gargauth

GAR-gawth

Pit fiend imprisoned in the Shield of the Hidden Lord

Haruman

HAIR-oo·man

Fallen paladin of Elturel, now a narzugon devil loyal to Zariel

jhessa Brightstar

JESS-ah

Priest of Lathander in ldyllglen

Kaejil OrOnmar

KAY-jil oh-ROON -mar

Tax collector imprisoned in Vanthampur Villa

Klim Jhasso

JAH-soh

Member of the Jhasso patriar (noble) family of Baldur's Gate

Kostchtchie

koss-CH EE-chee

Demon lord worshiped by some frost giants

Laraelra Thundreth

lah-RAIL-rah THUN·dreth

Liara Portyr

lee-AR-ah por-TEER

Proprietor of the Low Lantern, a tavern in Baldur's Gate
Commander of the Flaming Fist recalled to Baldur's Gate

Lulu

LOO-loo

Hollyphant suffering from memory loss

Matalotok

mah-tah-LOH-tok

Magical hammer stolen from Kostchtchie by Zariel

Mordenkainen

mor-den-KAY·nen, or

Famous archmage who inhabits the Tower of Urm in Avernus

mor-den·KIGH-nen
Mortlock Vanthampur

MORT-lock VAN-tham-per

Third son of Duke Thalamra Vanthampur of Baidu r's Gate

Myrkul

MER-kul

Nariangela

nar-ee-AWN -jeh-lah

M ortal god of death and necromancy, and one of the Dead Three
Erinyes bridge officer aboard Zariel's flying fortress

Nupperibo

nuh·pur-REE-boh

Least devil common throughout the Nine Hells

Olanthius

oh-LAN-thee-us

Fallen paladin ofElturel, now a death knight sworn to obey Zariel

Pherria Jynks

FAIR-ee-ah JINX

Acolyte of Torm in Elturel's High Hall cathedral

Reya Mantlemorn

RAY-ah MAN-tul-morn

Satiir Thione-Hhune

sah-TEER thee-AWN-hewn

Hellrider sworn to protect and defend Elturel
Member of the Hhune patriar (noble) family of Baldur's Gate

Shaleen Zoraz

shaw·LEEN zor-AHZ

Sewer maintenance supervisor imprisoned in Vanthampur Villa

Sibriex

SIB-ree·ex

Demon that looks like a bloated sack of pustulent flesh

Sylvira Savikas

sil-VEER-ah sah-VEE-kas

Tiefling archmage and expert on the Nine Hells

Thalamra Vantham pur

thah-LAM -rah VAN -tham-per

One of four dukes on the Co uncil of Four that governs Baldur's Gate

Thavius Kreeg

THAY-vee-us KREEG

Former cleric of Torm and High Overseer of Elturel

Thurstwell Vanthampur THURST·well VAN -tham-per

4

First son of Duke Thalamra Vanthampur of Baidu r's Gate

Trantolox

TRAN-toe-lox

Five-headed queen of evil dragons trapped in the Nine Hells
Nalfeshnee encountered outside the Bleeding Citadel

Traxigor

TRAX-eh-gor

Archmage transformed into an otter

Ulder Ravengard

UL-der RAY-ven-gard

Grand Duke of Baldur's Gate and leader of the Flaming Fist

Yael

YAY-el

Deceased defender of Elturel, now a ghost in the Nine Hells

Yeenoghu

yee-NO-goo

Demon lord worshiped by gnolls

Zari el

ZAR-ee-el, or ZAIR·ee-el

Archdevil and ruler of Avernus, the first layer of the Nine Hells

Tiamat

TEE-ah -mat

A BOUT THE ADVENTURE
ESIGNED FOR AN ADVENTURING PARTY OF
four to six 1st-level characters, Baldur's
Gate: Descent into Avernus is a DUNGEONS
& DRAGONS adventure that begins in the city
of Baldur's Gate and ends in Avernus, the
first layer of the Nine Hells. By the end of
the adventure. the characters should be 13th
level or higher. To run this adventure, you
need the fifth edition Player's Handbook,
Dungeon Master's Guide, and Monster Manual.
Use the first session of the game to help your players
create their 1st-level characters. As part of this process, the players can choose their party's dark secret
(see page 208).

ADVENTU RE OVERVIEW
The holy city of Elturel has disappeared from the Forgotten Realms and descended into Avernus, the first
layer of the Nine Hells. This event came about as the result of an infernal bargain between the archdevil Zariel,
who rules Avernus, and the treacherous High Overseer
of Elturel, Thavius Kreeg. Zariel is capturing cities and
using their citizens as fodder in the ongoing conflict between demons and devils known as the Blood War. Next
on Zariel's list of cities is Elturel's neighbor, Baldur's
Gate. The characters can be the heroes who descend
into Avernus, save Elturel from certain destruction, and
prevent a similar fate from befalling Baldur's Gate.

TROUBLE I N BALDUR'S GATE
Chapter 1 begins in the independent city of Baldur's
Gate, where the characters find themselves trapped
behind the city's walls after the gates are sealed to keep
out hundreds of refugees from the neighboring land
ofElturgard. However, the gates can't hold back news
that Elturgard's capital has fallen, and that Grand Duke
Ulder Ravengard of Baldur's Gate is missing-lost on
a diplomatic mission to Elturel. The fact that Elturel's
misfortune coincided with Ravengard's visit bas left
Baldurians wondering whether Baldur's Gate will suffer
Elturel's fate.
The characters are drafted by the F laming Fist, the
army of mercenaries tasked with protecting Baldur's
Gate. Without Grand Duke Ulde r Ravengard to lead
them, the Flaming Fist mercenaries are little more than
glorified thugs. The characters' orders are to help maintain peace by rooting out and destroying followers of
Bane, Bhaal, and Myrkul-evil gods collectively known
as the Dead Three. These vile priests, assassins, and
necromancers are murdering city folk at random, and
the Flaming Fist is too distracted and disorganized
to hunt them down and find their lair. In the course of
their investigation, the characters learn that the Dead
Three cultists are secretly being financed by Thalamra
Vanthampur, one of three remaining dukes who preside
over the government ofBaldur's Gate, using money stolen from the hoard of Ti am at, the evil queen of dragons
imprisoned in the Nine Hells.

With Grand Duke Ulder Ravengard. out of the way,
Thalamra is paying the Dead Three to shatter confidence in the F laming Fist so that all payments to the
decapitated organization can be cut off. Thalamra, a
devout disciple of the archdevil Zariel, has brokered a
deal that will enable her to claim the role of grand duke
once the Flaming Fist disbands, paving the way for
the city's descent into Avernus. To accomplish this last
goal, Thalamra needs an artifact called the Shield of the
Hidden Lord, imprisoned in which is a pit fiend named
Gargauth. Until recently, the shield was sealed in a tomb
under the city, but Thalamra's sons recently stole it and
transported it to the dungeon below their villa. So corrupt is the shield that its mere presence in Baldur's Gate
has contributed to the city's moral decay for decades.
To keep Baldur's Gate from falling into Zariel's
clutches, the characters must take the shjeld far away
from the city. Reya Mantlemorn, a young knight from
Elturel, suspects that the Vanthampurs are shelteri ng
Thavius Kreeg at their estate and offers aid. Characters
who storm Duke Vanthampur's villa find Thavius hidden
in the dungeon below it. Thavius is helping Thalamra
Vanthampur use the Shield of the Hidden Lord to bring
about the fall of Baldur's Gate, in much the same fashion
he used the Companion (see page 7) to doom Elturel.
If the characters slay Thavius, his soul travels to the
Nine Hells and re-forms as an amnizu devil on Avernus
(see page 132).

V I SIT T O CANDLEKEEP
In the course of dealing with Thavius Kreeg and the
Vanthampur family, characters are likely to acquire the
Shield ofthe Hidden Lord as well as an infernal puzzle
box that they can't open. They might also liberate a spy
imprisoned in Duke Vanthampur's dungeon who works
for Sylvira Savikas, a tiefling expert on the Nine Hells.
Determined to thwart devil worshipers in positions of
power throughout the Western Heartlands, Sylvira operates out of the library of Candlekeep and has spent years
monitoring devil activity in Baldur's Gate, Elturel, and
the surrounding region. Her spies are after the puzzle
box, which is believed to contafo a copy of the fiendfah
contract Thavius signed to seal Elturel's doom.
lf the characters wish to help Baldur's Gate further,
they must journey to the Nine Hells and rescue Ulder
Ravengard from what's left of Elturel. The characters are
urged to seek out Sylvira Savikas in Candlekeep. Sylvira
knows the secret to unlocking Thavius's puzzle box. She
can also facilitate the characters' descent into Avernus
and provide them with a map (albeit an unreliable one).
Sylvira advises characters to leave the Shield of the
Hidden Lord in her custody. However, there are benefits
to taking the shield with them, for Gargauth can guide
them through the Nine Hells in ways others cannot. With
or without the shield, the characters depart Candlekeep
and visit Sylvira's friend, Traxigor, a wizard who can
use the plane shift spell to get them to Elturel. At this
wizard's tower, they meet a hollyphant (see page 237)
named Lulu.
ABOUT THE ADVENTURE

5

To T H E NINE HE LLS!
CHAPTER 1: A TALE OF 1\vo CITIES
For characters of levels 1-4

Pressed into service by the Flaming Fist, the characters seek out and destroy Dead Three cultists
who are threatening Baidu r's Gate. As the machinations of the Vanthampur family come to light,
the characters have a cha nce to confront Thavius
Kreeg, the architect ofElturel's downfall, before
traveling to Candlekeep to unlock a mysterious
puzzle box and gain safe passage to the Nine Hells.

I
CHAPTER 2: ELTUREL HAS FALLEl
For characters of levels 5- 6

After befriending a hollyphant named Lulu, the
characters help survivors in Elturel, a city anchored by chains above the River Styx on the first
layer of the Nine Hells, and search for Grand Duke
Ulder Ravengard of Baldur's Gate.

____

_.)

CHAPTER 3: AVERNUS
For characters oflevels 7- 10

The characters venture across the wastelands of
Avernus in search of allies, face off against warlords and fiends, and search for a way to destroy
the Companion or break E lturel's chains.

r

CHAPTER 4 : SWORD OF ZARIEL
For characters of levels 11- 12

~

The Sword of Zariel might be the key to Elturel's
salvation, but to get it, the characte rs must find the
Bleeding Citadel- a litt le slice of heaven trapped in
hell. After they unlock Lulu's memories and claim
the sword, the characters must decide who is fit to
wield s uch a powerful weapon of good. _ _ _ _ )

I

I

I.

C H APTER 5: ESCAPE FROM AVERNUS
For characters of levels 13 and higher

The characters use the treasures they've acquired
and the deals they've made to free themselves and
Elturel from Avernus. Will they use the Sword
ofZariel or strike an infernal bargain to free the
planetar trapped in the Companion? Will they coax
a demon into breaking Elturel's chains? Or will
they cut a deal with the archdevil Zariel?
______.

J

DIAGRAM 0 .1: ADVENTUR E fL O W, t<l\RT

ABOIJT THE ADV£NTUllE

Chapter 2 opens with the characters' arrival in Elturel,
which is anchored by enormous chains and trapped under the baleful light of the Companion. If the characters
do nothing, the city will be pulled down into the River
Styx and bound to the Nine Hells forever. Lulu tries her
best to serve as the party's guide in Avernus, but the hollyphant's memories are fragmented. It becomes clear,
however, that Lulu has a personal connection to Zariel,
dating back to the archdevil's former angelic existence.
After scouring Elturel for survivors and clashing
with the denizens of Avernus, the characte rs encounter the valiant Ulder Ravengard, who has been
placed in the most unusual s ituation of defending a
city he has long opposed. The beleaguered Ravengard
urges the characters to do whatever they can to free
Elturel and return what's left of it to FaerOn. To do so,
they must scour Avernus for the means to destroy the
Companion or break the enormous chains that shackle
that city, as described in chapter 3.
Avernus has long been a battlefield in the never-ending Blood War. Apart from clashing demons and devils, petty warlords scour the Avernian wastelands in
search of treasure. salvage, and fuel for their infernal
war machines. Characters who forge an alliance with
one warlord risk alienating the others . By acquiring
an infernal war machine, characters can travel quickly
across Avernus-a domain rife with tortured souls, warmongers, and devils eager to tempt would-be heroes into
soul-corrupting deals.
The more time she spends with the characters, the
more Lulu begins to remember long-lost memories of
the Sword ofZariel, an angelic weapon with the power
to destroy the Companion. After Zariel's fall from grace,
the sword was hidden in a stronghold called the Bleeding Citadel-a celestial sanctuary trapped in Avernus.
The quest for the sword forms the crux of chapter 4,
leading to the revelation that Zariel can be redeemed.
The characters' success doesn't hinge on acquiring
the Sword of Zariel or helping Zariel find redemption,
as Gargauth is quick to point out should the characters
consult with him. There are other ways to free Elturel,
but only if the characters are willing to cut deals with
Avernus's most evil denizens. The characters might
broker a deal with the deposed archdevil Bel, who
longs to supplant Zariel and regain his title as ruler of
Avernus. They might stoke the rage of a horrific demon
called Crokek'toeck and trick it into gnawing through
Elturel's chains. They might come to terms with an evil
dragonborn paladin named Arkhan the Cruel, using
him to broker a deal with Tiamat. By returning her stolen treasure, characters can convince Tiamat to break
Elturel's chains.
As tempting as such purs uits can be, the characters
must be careful, for devil deals, demon lords, and Tiamat's rage number among the multiverse's greatest
threats. Also, Zariel herself might become cross with
the characters for daring to meddle in her diabolical
affairs. How the adventure concludes depends on the
choices the characters make, the chaos they foment, and
the deals they forge, as discussed in chapter 5.

